We're going to do a bit of a recap of simple
dynamical systems and we're going to start
with the very classical system which is a
mass on wheels connected by a spring to a fixed point.
The displacement of the cart with respect
to some data is given by the variable X. And
X increases positively to the right. If the
spring is compressed then it's going to push
the cart towards the left. And the direction
indicated by the arrow and the symbol Fs.
That's the force exerted by the spring. Now
we can imagine the situation where this spring
is stretched and that's the case when X is
negative. And now the spring is trying to
pull the cart towards the right. And so the
arrow indicating the direction of Fs is now
pointing towards the right. So the spring
can either push or pull the cart and the spring
force is equal to minus K times X, the way
I've drawn this particular diagram.
Now there's friction operating and friction
is a force that opposes the direction of motion.
So in the top figure, if the cart is moving
towards the left, then the friction force
is going to be towards the right and vice
versa for the figure below that. And the friction
force is proportional to the velocity, proportional
to ẋ. And B is the friction coefficient.
In order to understand this we're going to
draw a free body diagram. So here I have a
mass M and its displacement X. And there were
two forces acting on the mass. There is the
spring force Kx and the friction force Bẋ.
The acceleration of the body is equal to the
sum of the forces that are acting on it. And
I can rearrange this expression into this
form here. So this is a second order linear
differential equation which describes the
motion of the mass M.
Now if you're a little bit rusty on solving
your differential equation, let me give you
a hint. We can propose that X is equal to
E to the ST. That it is an exponential function
of time. And S is the time constant.
Now I could take the derivative of this, and
I got an expression now for ẋ. And with
some simplification I can see that ẋ is
equal to S times X. And I can take the derivative
again and get this expression here. Now I
can make these substitutions into my original
equation and I end up with this expression
and I can cancel out the X's and I end up
with this, which is called the characteristic
equation. This is now a quadratic equation
in the variable S. And we can solve for S
quite easily.
Here is the quadratic equation again and the
well-known solution to the quadratic equation
is here. These values of S are known as the
poles of the system. And they define the response,
the position response of the mass as a function
of time. And remember X is an exponential
function of time and S.
If we consider the determinant of this equation,
that's the expression inside the square root.
It has three interesting sets of values. If
the determinant is greater than zero then
S has two real and different values. If the
determinant is equal to zero then S has two
real and equal values. Two values of S are
the same. And if the determinant is less than
zero, then S is a complex conjugate pair.
In terms of the physical response of the system,
this case is referred to as the damped response.
This case is called critically damped. And
this case is an oscillating response. The
overall response, the position of our mass
as the function of time is the superposition
of the response due to each pole. So it's
some constant, times the response of the first
pole, plus some constant times the response
due to the second pole.
A very classical way to consider the response
of a second order dynamical system such as
we're studying here is to look at it's damping
ratio and that's given by this expression
here. And the graph shows the time response
for different values of damping ratio. When
the damping ratio is greater than one, we
say that the response is over damped. We see
that it responds very very slowly as a function
of time. When the damping ratio is less than
one, we see that the response is somewhat
oscillatory. And as the damping ratio get's
smaller and smaller we see that the system's
response is more and more oscillatory. The
over shoot is higher and there are more cycles
of oscillation.
When the damping ratio gets to zero there
is no decay at all. And the system will continue
to oscillate forever without any kind of decay.
The damping ratio 1 corresponds to critical
damping. It is the smallest value of the damping
ratio for which there will be no overshoot.
Consider now we want to simulate the response
of this differential equation. I can rearrange
it so that ẍ is isolated by itself on the
left hand side. And now I am going to start
to draw of block diagram of a system which
has got the same dynamics as our differential
equation. I'm going to draw an arrow and label
it ẍ. And I'm going to add an integrator
we integrate ẍ. And now I have ẋ. And
I'm going to integrate it again and now I
have X. The signal ẋ and multiply it by
minus b then I have compute this term here.
And the triangle indicates a gain block. It's
output is equal to minus b times it's input.
Then we introduce another gain block here
with a gain of minus K. If I add these two
signals together with a summing junction,
the result now is this expression shown here
in yellow. And if I divide that by M, that
is by applying a gain of 1 on M, I have now computed
an expression that is equivalent to ẍ.
So I joined the output of this gain block
to the signal that I started with. So this
is a block diagram of a dynamic system. And
if I built this in a simulation environment
and simulated how it performed as a function
of time, the signal X is going to give me
the position response of the dynamic system
that we looked at in the first place. The
system with a cart and a spring and some friction.
Well this is the system that I just described
but I implemented it in the Simulink modelling
package that's a part of MATLAB. Here are
the two integrators; the integrator that integrates
the ẍ into ẋ that is acceleration to velocity and this integrator which integrates velocity into position.
This particular integrator has got an initial
condition of 1. That's the initial value of
the displacement X. That's the initial position
of the cart. So the way we define our coordinate
conventions means that for X=1, the spring
is compressed. That means the first thing
that the spring is going to do is to push
the cart away. It's going to push the cart
into -X direction.
So let's simulate the model as we have it
here. And here we see the position response
of the cart. As I just said a moment ago,
the cart is moving in the -X direction. It's
oscillating a little bit but the energy is
decaying from the system and it settles out
at a position of X=0.
Now I'm going to adjust some of the parameters.
This gain block here represents the inverse
mass so I can open up the parameter settings
here and I'm going to change the mass from
2 kg to 4 kg. And I'm going to apply that
parameter. And now I am going to simulate
the response. You'll note that it changes.
We'll see that the oscillations are in fact
more intense. And that's because our system
starts with a greater amount of potential
energy. That's the energy stored in that compressed
spring.
More mass is going to have more initial potential
energy, which is going to take longer to be
dissipated by the friction. If I increase
the mass even more, turn it up to 2 kg, apply
that, and here we see that the oscillation
has become much slower and it's also the rate
of decay is much much less.
I'm going to do now is to put that back to
the value I started with which was 2 kg, simulate
the original system that looks like this.
And now what I'm going to do is to increase
the amount of friction.
So originally we had a friction coefficient of
2 and changed the friction coefficient to
4 and what we should see is that the oscillation
should die out more quickly because the energy
is dissipated much more quickly because there
is an increased amount of friction; increase
it some more, increase it say to 8, and apply
that parameter and simulate again and there
we see. There’s absolutely no oscillation
at all now. The system is over damped.
So let's recap on how we convert differential
equation to an algebraic equation. I make
these substitutions for X and it's derivative
ẋ and ẍ in terms of S and X. Now it's
possible that we can consider S as an operator.
That is it's an operator that converts differential
equation to an algebraic equation. Once we've
done this we can solve for S and we call these
values of S the poles of this system. And
they indicate the dynamic response of the
system as a function of time. If a system
has got more than one pole, the system we
looked at has two poles, then the response is the
superposition, the summation of the response
due to each particular value of S.
What we considered earlier was called the
unforced response. There was no other force
acting on the system apart from the spring
and the friction. We position the cart at
some initial value of X not equal to zero.
And then let it go and watched what happens.
Now what I'm interested in is what's called
the forced response. Now I'm going to apply
a force F to the cart and I want to understand
how it moves. So I draw the free body diagram
again but now it's got an extra force. It's
got the force that I'm applying to the cart
F as well as the spring force and the friction
force. Now I consider the force balance acting
on the mass in the free body diagram and rearrange
it like this. Now I'm going to consider S
as an operator. I'm replacing the derivatives
of X with the operator S and now I'm going
to write this. And you'll notice a few differences.
Firstly the derivatives have gone and I've
introduced my operator S. You'll also notice
that I've changed the lower case x to a capital
X and I've changed the lower case f to a capital
F. What I've done is computed the Laplace
transform of my differential equation. Capital
X represents the Laplace transform of the
position of the cart lower case x and capital
F represents the Laplace transform of the
applied force which is lower case f.
Now I can rearrange my Laplace transform expression
into a ratio which we call a transfer function.
It is the ratio of the output of the system
X to the input of the system F. And to make
things very clear I've said that capital X
is the function of the operator s and capital
F is a function of the operator s.
Let's consider a very general dynamic system
as a black box. The input is a signal x which
is a function of time and the output is another
signal y which is a function of time. Then
mathematically the output of the system y
is related to the input to the system x, convolved
with the impulse response of that dynamic
system, which is denoted by g as a function of time.
In the Laplace domain where we've just been
operating, things are a little bit simpler.
The Laplace transform of the input system
is capital X. Laplace transform output is
capital Y. And G is the transfer function
of the system.
So now the output Y is simply the product
of the input X multiplied by the transfer
function. The simple multiplication in the
Laplace domain where it is a convolution in
the time domain.
I've covered a lot of territory in this section.
And if you previously encountered these concepts,
I hope that it served as a bit of a memory
refresher for you. If you've never encountered
these concepts before then what I've been
talking about is probably a little bewildering.
It might be worthwhile trying to go through
the content again. Perhaps contact a friend
or colleague who can talk you through some
of this material or try and find an introductory
control systems text which will cover this
material in much much more detail.